{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red191\green191\blue191;}
{\info
{\author Taliesin Smith}}\paperw15840\paperh12240\margl1134\margr1134\margb1134\margt1134\vieww22980\viewh16340\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\pardeftab709\sb240\sa120

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 Ramp it up! Action based guide for creating accessible websites
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab709
\cf0 \

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx1440
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx7200
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0  1. Text & Solid Code Base
\b0\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0 2. Links &
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs20 Navigation
\b0\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0 3. Images &
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs20 Charts
\b0\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0 4. Tables, Forms &
\fs24  
\b0 \

\b\fs20 Interactives
\b0\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0 5. Colour & 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs20 Layout
\b0\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709\qc

\b\fs20 \cf0 6. Audio/Video & 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs20 Other Formats
\b0\fs24 \cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx1440
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx7200
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\fs20 \cf0 Electronic text-based content is accessible by nature. It can be rendered visually, auditorily and tactilely.  \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\b \cf0 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\b0 \cf0 Use HTML\'92s built-in 
\b semantic structure 
\b0 [1] - headings, lists, quotes - to code meaning directly into your content. \
\
Keep the 
\b reading level
\b0  as simple as possible.
\fs24 \

\fs20 \
Define the 
\b natural language
\b0  & mark language changes.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Ensure there is a 
\b doctype, charset & 
\b0 a unique 
\b page title
\b0  in each of your templates for a valid code base.
\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\fs20 \cf0 Links, like stepping stones, help you find your way. Use 
\b unique
\b0  
\b meaningful words
\b0  for linked text. Keep links DRY [2] (do not repeat yourself  over and over and over). 
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Leave 
\b context changes - 
\b0 pop-ups, new tabs -
\b  
\b0 in the control of the user.\

\fs24 \

\fs20 Use 
\b skip navigation links & landmarks
\b0\fs24  
\fs20 to provide direct access to page content.  Use HTML5 landmark tags.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Design well-planned,
\b  consistent navigation. 
\b0 Usability helps all users.
\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\fs20 \cf0 Provide meaningful 
\b text alternatives
\b0  for all content images. The 
\b alt attribute
\b0  is required, but can be left empty, if appropriate.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 For 
\b charts or complex images you 
\b0 may need to link to supplementary content.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 The goal
\b  
\b0 of text alternatives
\b  
\b0 is to 
\b maintain the meaning
\b0  of the document whether you can see the image or not.
\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\b\fs20 \cf0 Simplify tables
\b0  wherever possible. 
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Use the rich 
\b semantic table mark-up
\b0  available in HTML  - thead, tfoot, tbody. Introduce tables with the 
\b caption
\b0  element. Appropriately distinguish table header cells from table data cells (th, td) on rows and columns.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Use 
\b tables only for tabular data 
\b0 \'96 not content layout!
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Forms are complex by nature, so k
\b eep them simple 
\b0 \'96 don't ask for data you don't need.
\fs24 \
\

\b\fs20 Use & associate
\b0  
\b labels
\b0  for every form control. Use the 
\b button element
\b0  when you need a button.
\fs24 \
\

\b\fs20 Group form controls 
\b0 to create meaningful organization in forms - legend, fieldset, optgroup. Organization is good for all users.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Design 
\b clear error identification
\b0  
\b & intuitive error handling. 
\b0 Clearly tell the user where they have gone wrong, how to fix the problem and when they have succeeded.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Provide 
\b reasonable time-outs
\b0  (think user control).
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Employ 
\b WAI-ARIA
\b0  [3] standard to define roles and behaviours that HTML cannot describe. This is particularly important for interactive structures like forms.\
\
Note: most legal cases have happened around in-accessible tables & forms [4].
\fs24 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\fs20 \cf0 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\b \cf0 Don't rely on colour alone
\b0  for meaning.
\fs24 \
\

\b\fs20 Choose colours wisely.
\b0  Avoid confusing colours The 
\i Brewer Palette
\i0  is a good resource
\i .
\i0\fs24 \
\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\fs20 \cf0 Test for 
\b sufficient contrast
\b0  ratios.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Use 
\b CSS for layout  & consistency.
\b0  Using 
\b CSS & HTML together properly
\b0  is best method in making your content accessible & easier to maintain.
\fs24 \
\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab709

\b\fs20 \cf0 Do not auto-play 
\b0  anything (think user control).
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 Provide open or closed 
\b captions 
\b0 for audio and video.
\fs24 \
\

\b\fs20 Describe video
\b0  when the meaning cannot be understood by the soundtrack alone. Video description can be open or closed.
\fs24 \
\

\b\fs20 Providing transcripts,
\b0  in some cases (e.g. talking heads & interviews), makes better sense than captions.
\fs24 \
\

\fs20 For other formats, such as PDF or Word documents, first ask is there a reason not to use HTML? Follow the WCAG for content in Word documents and PDFs.
\b  PDFs must be tagged
\b0  to be accessible [6].
\fs24 \cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \

\b Summary
\b0 \
When web design teams ramp up a website for users of assistive technology and\
other edge cases, the payoff happens at many levels. The website will likely be\
easier to find, be of a higher quality, be easier to maintain, last longer and work\
better for everyone - all of which contribute to a better return on the investment. Just\
like accessible ramps at building entrances, the virtual ramp built into websites\
benefits more than the intended audience.\
\

\b References
\b0 \
[1] (2013) Semantic Structure. WebAIM.org. http://webaim.org/techniques/semanticstructure/\
[2] Don\'92t repeat yourself. Wikipedia.org. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself\
[3] WAI-ARIA Overview. W3C.org. http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/aria.php\
[4] Monsebraaten, L. (2010, Sep 19) Blind woman says federal websites discriminate against the visually\
impaired. Toronto Star.\
http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2010/09/19/blind_woman_says_federal_websites_discriminate_against_th\
e_visually_impaired.html\
[5] Brewer, C. Harrower, M. & Pennsylvania State University. Color Brewer 2.0 http://colorbrewer2.org/\
[6] Clark, J. (2005) Facts and Opinions About PDF Accessibility. A List Apart. http://alistapart.com/article/pdf_accessibility\
\

\b Resources
\b0 \
Clark, J. (2003) Building accessible websites. Indianapolis: New Riders.\
Hendren, S. & Glenney, B. (2012) Accessible Icon Project: http://www.accessibleicon.org/\
Horton, S. & Quesenbery, W. (2014) A Web For Everyone.\
http://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/a-web-for-everyone/\
WCAG 2.0: http://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG20/glance/Overview.html\
WCAG Samurai: http://www.wcagsamurai.org/\
WebAIM: http://webaim.org/\
WAVE Accessibility Evaluation Tool: http://wave.webaim.org/\
\

\b Acknowledgements
\b0 \
Thanks to Amita Pharshy for her comments.\
\
\
}